Hey, I'm Jen [inaudible], I'm Robert Krulwich, Radiolab.
Today our topic is limits, limits. How far can you take your,
your body? We've done that. We've exhausted that thing. So,
so let's go uptown to the limits of the brain to tackle just a piece of that
question. Let's just take a look at memory. Okay. All right, great.
And we're going to do that by telling a story,
a story that we heard from Jonah Lehrer, you know, frequent guests on the show,
author of the books, Proust was a neuroscientist.
How we decide the story begins in a small, um,
town in the old Soviet Union back in the 1920s and it's about a newspaper
reporter named Mr s, at least that's what we're going to call him. Yes.
So Mr Eslan newspaper reporter,
and one day his boss starts yelling at him because his boss gives out these
assignments,
talks to the whole newsroom and he notices that Mr s never takes notes.
And this drives his boss crazy cause his bosses, you know,
saying all these things they have to report on and Mr Estis never writes them
down. And so his boss calls him into his office and says, are you lazy?
Do you not take this job seriously? And Mr [inaudible] responsible,
I just remember
[inaudible]
and the editor says, come on, and he sort of quizzes him. He says,
what did I assign you yesterday? His boss gives him this quiz and sure enough,
he remembers everything. He remembers everything.
The editors said word for word
and the editors thinking, I don't know what's wrong with this guy. I mean,
he's not a great reporter, but he has something queer going on in his head.
So he decided to send him to a famous
medical doctor in Moscow. A are Luria who is
Luria Louie Louie of music. Classical figure in,
in your psychology and in psychology in general. And who is this host?
Your name? Oh, that Goldberg. I have a clinical professor at Ted. Well,
you political school Goldberg Knew Laurie o Luhya was my mentor.
I've worked with her closely this year. Not only was he a student of Loris,
Luria gave him a present once they see this book,
the book about the original book about this book is one of the great works of
early neuroscience. So we are going to the right guy.
You have an autographed copy.
It is a beautiful and almost novelistic description of what happened to Mr s.
The original title was a little book about big Beverly
[inaudible]. Okay, so Jonah, this guy,
Mr [inaudible] goes to the psychologist Luria.
Now what does Lauria do with them?
Luria during the book talks about how he wrote random numbers on a blackboard
numbers like one, eight, six, four,
three about 50 numbers and asked Mr [inaudible] to remember them.
Here we are on page 60.
That's what studied the material or the board for about three minutes.
Slow skews. Eyes opened them for a moment. Okay. Done.
And with that, you would really love this series. Precisely. Six,
six.
[inaudible] that's like a superpower.
Yeah. And this impresses Larry. He says, so he takes it up to the next level.
Then Larry, uh, gives him, you know, this, this,
this incredible assortment of memory tasks and everything from memorize Dante's
inferno, um, to Dr [inaudible] the whole thing. No,
no. Wow. Not the whole thing.
Just the opening stances and men coming [inaudible] nearly provide [inaudible]
use the really weird thing. Mr s does not read Italian months, speak Italian.
He had no idea what he was talking about,
like theory [inaudible] Murray and yet the thing he memorizes,
he gets word perfect. Yeah. And not only that,
he was tested 15 years after.
He'd memorize those stances and he's still got it right. Yeah. Oh Man.
You remembered everything. He had everything.
What did you mean by you mean every fig? Okay. So if he,
suppose he interviewed you 10 years ago,
he would have remembered the color of your sweater,
whether you held him Mike in the left hand or in the right hand.
He would have remembered everything. I mean, everything.
Laurian never talks about a computational limit on Mr s's memory as an
experiment or I soon found myself in the state.
Virgin got utter confusion and they simply had to admit that the capacity of his
baby had low distinct limits.
How can there be no limits?
Because I'm thinking about the size of a normal head.
It's like 50 centimeters or something in diameter.
The brain is three pounds. It's a very confined little situation.
How could there be no limits? I wish there was a good answer.
Nobody has any idea why it is he had this infinite capability for recall.
What it does suggest though is that the brain has the capability to store an
incredible amount of stuff. How much stuff though?
How much can you GAM into a human brain? I don't,
I don't think anyone knows. I mean, so let's just stop.
Let's just call it quits. Go ahead and like, no, no, no, and if I forget that,
in fact, let me take you to a competition which investigates that very question.
We're going to change locations from where we are. We just now Russia.
We were in Russia from Russia in 1920s too. Okay.
It this London 2009 here we are at the world memory championships,
the worldwide, the world memory championships. Just go with me for a sec. Okay,
so we're in a hotel in central London.
The lobby is crowded with the world's best memorizers. So what was your name?
Get people here from like Oman [inaudible]. I'm Dr Grantee Manchester. Hello,
I'm a meal Hall Netherlands. Yeah, Rick de Young.
Even have a team of Chinese girls in the corner getting a cheer.
And what are we doing here? Well,
the people here a little bit like the guy you were describing, Mr s,
they are walking experiments in brain stuffing
the differences. They're perfectly normal human beings. Just
like take this guy on the veining world memory champion.
I'm 33 years old and I live in Nottingham.
Then can take a string of numbers that is 1400 numbers long, random number,
random numbers, and he can commit it to memory instantly.
He can take a deck of cards and memorize it in 24 seconds.
Wow. Yeah. We've not actually reached, you know,
any kind of upper limit of what is possible to memorize yet anybody still
consistently in thing. So here's what we did.
We, we found a guy,
my name's Ronnie White and I am the 2009 USA memory champion.
He's a Navy reservist from Dallas, Texas.
I had to get permission from my unit to come here,
but we followed them around the competition. What's about to happen?
Well the competition's about to start, you know,
they want to be a fun day cause we wanted to know like how do you do it?
How do you take the limits of a normal brain and completely shattered.
So I walked in the room that day wearing my Michael Phelps tee shirt. You know,
it said USA on the front
socks. The, the final minutes before you start an event,
you're sitting in your chair and you're just collecting your thoughts.
I put on my military glasses, I got some,
they look at drew Carey's glasses and I put those on drew money. Hey,
remain calm. You know,
I wore those all throughout my tour in Afghanistan.
If you're going down a road and you're needing to be on the lookout for ideas,
but you're not calm, you're nervous and jittery, you could die.
Then I'll put on some noise canceling headsets. Then I just close my eyes,
sit in my chair.
[inaudible] neurons on the ready. They say, yeah.
That moment, 60 people turn over papers
on these pieces of paper or number six, one nothing but numbers, numbers,
numbers, numbers, numbers, numbers, forever. What are they doing? Well,
they have to memorize them, so they just have to do shit.
All these people staring at pieces of paper. Yeah. Absolute silence.
Heads down. 60 heads down, staring at numbers six, seven but here's the,
here's the interesting thing in their heads. Three, they're not seeing numbers.
Four instead, those numbers are turning into eight of George Bush or spy.
Go One. Randy Richardson, he's a friend. Line 45 a rash.
Michael Jordan, Chuck Norris, Donnie Brasco, two Bush.
That was boy George. Joe T, Martha Stewart, George Michael,
Ben Franklin, Chuck Norris, and Indiana Jones,
my friend Ronnie kink. Todd. Uh,
I have a person assigned to every number from zero to 99,
and then I have a verb assigned every person from zero to 99.
And then I have a noun assign to every digit.
So you're just taking the person verbs and objects.
Please hold the cards down and you're putting them all together and they really
don't make sense.
Well,
give me an example of the images I saw.
I saw Albert Einstein riding the roller coaster and do a bunch of fog.
Five, nine, three, seven, eight, seven. That was one of the images. Um,
I saw a fat Albert cartoon character driving a car
nine, nine.
Um, I saw a Victoria's secret model, which was one of my favorite pictures.
I saw Victoria's secret bottles shooting a gun,
uh, stuff like that.
So there seems to be something about turning data into pictures that makes that
data edge, it becomes easier to hold on to. Do you have any idea why?
Do I have any idea of why? You know, but Jonah,
I dunno, I would just be purely speculating here,
but the visual cortex has been hugely enhanced in human evolution. It's the,
you know, the rear half of our brain because we know that memories, you know,
there is no memory center of the brain. It's distributed in our sensory areas.
It might make a little sense that given that we've got this huge chunk of visual
Cortex, that it's easier to store memory there.
Okay, so let me ask you, how did Ron's visual cortex do in the big content?
Well, Ron, Ron didn't actually do so well.
He did it [inaudible] he was trying to memorize these 12 decks of cards and he
had constructed this whole, like a stack of pictures. But he,
he did them in the wrong order and he screwed it up. He lost,
he lost really badly. Unfortunately, I was shocked. I mean,
I was just shocked that that knocked me out of any passion,
you know, a little bit, by the way, who didn't lose it? Remember Mr [inaudible],
the guy we started this conversation with? Yeah, sure. This is interesting.
It turns out that Mr s also had little pictures and little characters running
around in his mind. But unlike Ron,
he never asked for the picture.
No, he couldn't. You know, even when he wanted not to do it,
he couldn't help but do it anyway.
What he was born that way he had this tremendous memory without any effort,
without any mnemonic techniques. Phishing the point.
You mean his mind made the pictures automatically? Yeah.
Mr S had a condition called synesthesia where your senses get kind of tangled
up. So he heard voices in terms of colors, right? Colors of voices,
textures, smells of words. His numbers weren't just numbers.
Sometimes he imagines walking through a crowded Moscow street and the numbers
are scattered along the way.
And so he describes how I'm walking down the street. There's the number one.
This is a proud, well-built that then I make a right turn onto the side street.
There is the number two years of high-spirited do over.
I then I make a left turn. There's a number three, a gloomy person. Why?
I don't know. Nobody knows.
Nobody knows exactly what accounts for the individual associations of
synesthesia that they just exist,
but they're this extra scaffold for mr s's memory to cling to. Wow.
So he's like Ron, except he's using all his senses to remember numbers. Yeah,
exactly. So I'm getting back to the plot. What did, uh,
what did he do with his talent? He became a traveling circus freak basically.
Yeah. [inaudible] let me just remember the fish. Eliminate the nimbleness.
Yeah. He gave up journalism to perform for crowds.
Just imagine it when something like this. She had told me, please
see Mr Memory. Thank you. A lot of shitty shit.
Imagine this in a big crowd. He walks onto the stage,
he gives them an invitation. He asked them to shout random members.
25 [inaudible] seven
541 5,203 then after a little while, the crowd, yeah,
quiets down. Eh,
Mr s would close his eyes and step forward and he would remember them all.
This was his job.
Yeah. And it wasn't just numbers by the way. He was thrown weird phrases.
Nonsense sounds, nouns, verbs.
And sometimes you do four shows a day and the more he did,
the more obvious it became with this business,
you'd had a downside.
[inaudible]
here's what we're going to finally reach.
Maybe the limits question that we're really examining in this program.
You would hear all these nonsense phrases being thrown at him and they would
build up in his mind, and it's important to note.
This was incredibly frustrating for Mr [inaudible].
He had a constant stream of memories pouring into his brain.
He couldn't get any of it out, and on top of that, as they piled up,
the memories began to kind of Mush together.
One would trigger another and then another and then another.
It was the suffocating web of association. The moment he encountered everything,
everything debug the both the related in his past to that something was
immediately evoked in his bedroom. For example, let's suppose
a man in the audience stands up and you shout out the word
no. For a split second, Mr s sees a dog,
which suggests another dog and then another dog,
and then every dog he ever saw
and the main suggestions, not just that man,
but the other man.
The minute he knew all the other competitions were a similar look mean and stood
up in, chatted something similar.
He was barrage. He was brilliant was all kinds of memories.
Totally unrelated.
Everything layer one layer on top of of the other. Horrible. I agree.
Oh that would be a bloody nightmare.
The mind isn't just interested in storing information.
It really wants to be able to get meaning out of that information,
out of those memories.
And that actually seems to be turned off to be inhibited by remembering too much
[inaudible].
In other words, there really is a limit in our heads.
It's a different kind of limit,
really not the limitless ability to remember one number after another,
but a precious balance in your head.
If you remember too much you will make no sense of the world.
It's weird.
I've never actually thought of making sense of the world as being an active
negotiation. Yeah. Do you know what I mean?
It's very much that they kind of make sense because if you think about like
living here in New York City,
all the people you bump into,
if you remembered every freaking one you would have fun.
Like you wouldn't be able to have a relationship with your wife or your husband,
your child. Cause they just be lost in this thick crowd and your head
just like came out somehow. That's the balance.
The act for getting is crucial to create
preciousness. Although I do wish I had a better memory.
That's your name again.